#### 

This story is not part of the metered paywall. [Learn
more](https://help.medium.com/hc/en-us/articles/360018834334)

# AsyncTask in RecyclerView

Basically, this article based on **Today I Learned** category and it’s a
tutorial based article where it tells about, how to use AsyncTask in
RecyclerView. So, Let’s started.

I am new in Android development. A few days ago, I was working on an application
where I have a task that downloaded the image from the internet through URL.
After some research, I got no proper solution to that task. This is basically
for the learning purpose, and how AsyncTask works.

> AsyncTask is a class that performs an operation in the background and publish
> results on UIThread without blocking it. In AsyncTask class there is a main
method **doInBackground,** that helps to perform the operation in the
background.

So, Let’s started with simple AsyncTask code where it has three parameters.
First one is for performing the operation in the background in
**doInBackground** method. Second one is for show any progress on screen until
work in background is finished in doInBackground method. And the last one is for
showing the result of doInBackground method on the main thread means UIThread.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*YZ9EXpaphAcRawrvUoWMiQ.png)

Now I have to download a single image from the Internet using AsyncTask class
and post it on the main thread. Below code creates a link with the URL and
download image from the internet and put into an ImageView.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*rJNiLQZOTcw8AAhS_7gXxg.png)

After that, Now execute the task in , MainActivity using **execute()** method of
AsyncTask class.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*OnAm30Bk4zlc89f399b0gg.png)

So here the process of downloading a single image from the internet is complete.
The image is downloaded by clicking the download button. See below the output of
the above code.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*j9jAuh7WKn_ESo24W6osCQ.gif)

Now let’s move to next task, that is downloading multiple images from the
internet and setting in RecyclerView. After some research on the internet, the
references are doing the same task by using **Picasso** and **Glide** and some
of the references they are using AsyncTask to perform this work are very
difficult to understand for beginners. I have to find simple way to perform this
task.

So, we have to create an external class of AsyncTask and download images for
each item in it.

In RecyclerView adapter there is a method onBindViewHolder that is called every
item in the list. For downloading multiple images, we have to keep in mind that
there is also multiple calling of AsyncTask class. So, that’s why we will create
an external class that extends AsyncTask class and use it in OnBindViewHolder
method.

So, create an external class that extends AsyncTask and pass two parameters: one
is for ImageView type and other is for Context.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*8SusOJYf4EJXw-2UF-fihw.png)

Now create an object of this class in **onBindViewHolder** method and call
**execute** method.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*YnaRZTS_3iPHe1h-0_KgrA.png)

The **DataClass.java **is a data placeholder and contains image url to download
for each item.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*isD5a8OnGnyyU23LpcuWTA.png)

Now set RecyclerView and LayoutManager in MainActivity. Here shown below the
code **MainActivity.java**

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*c8yRQKFol_rHI7pv89ppgA.png)

Here is the Final output of the task.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*_KHx41OYpmHjkRFmfZ6FMg.gif)

*****

*Originally published at
*[medium.com](https://medium.com/@aminullahtaj/asynctask-in-recyclerview-c82ff3ea5012)*
on December 30, 2018.*

* [Android](https://android.jlelse.eu/tagged/android?source=post)
* [Recyclerview](https://android.jlelse.eu/tagged/recyclerview?source=post)
* [Asynctask](https://android.jlelse.eu/tagged/asynctask?source=post)
* [Asynctask In
Recyclerview](https://android.jlelse.eu/tagged/asynctask-in-recyclerview?source=post)
* [Development](https://android.jlelse.eu/tagged/development?source=post)

### [Aminullah Taj Muhammad](https://android.jlelse.eu/@aminullahtaj)

Software Engineer AdevAmin

### [AndroidPub](https://android.jlelse.eu/?source=footer_card)

The Pub(lication) for Android & Tech, focused on Development
